---
layout: page
title: mIA - Generative AI for Retail
description: A web application featuring an interactive AI avatar for retail, with user management, content handling, and KPI dashboards.
img: assets/img/mIA-background.png
importance: 1
category: work
giscus_comments: false
---

mIA is a web application leveraging generative AI, designed specifically for the retail sector. The core feature of mIA is an interface with a virtual "avatar" that users can interact with via chat. This avatar is represented by a fullscreen video of a person, with synchronized lip movements and gestures managed by a generative model. The avatar's responses are generated by integrating a text generation model with a domain-specific and customizable textual database, allowing for tailored content delivery.

In addition to the avatar interaction, mIA includes:
- **User Management**: Interface for handling user accounts.
- **Content Management**: Tools for managing various content types.
- **KPI Dashboard**: An interactive dashboard for monitoring platform usage and consumption metrics.
- **SSO Integration**: Dynamic user management through Single Sign-On (SSO).

The software also features a login screen where every page requires authentication, although SSO logins bypass this requirement.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/mIA-avatar.png" title="mIA Avatar" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/mIA-file-manager.png" title="File management" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The mIA application interface features a full-screen avatar that interacts with users, a file and user management interface. Each component is designed for seamless integration and user experience.
</div>

The layout of mIA showcases a robust combination of AI-driven interaction, content management, and user interface design. Each feature is designed to enhance the retail experience, providing a comprehensive and engaging tool for users.